---
hip: 9999
title: "Transitioning Security Team Members on Project Deprecation"
authors: [ "Matt Butcher <matt.butcher@microsoft.com>" ]
created: "2020-09-24"
type: "process"
status: "draft"
---

## Abstract

Helm maintains a security team composed of interested maintainers from Helm projects. This
proposal clarifies that to be a member of the security team, one must be a maintainer of
an active (non-deprecated) project.

## Motivation

The existing security team documentation does not cover cases where a Helm project is
marked deprecated. However, because the security team discusses sensitive and potentially
damaging issues, the Helm project requires clarity on this point.

## Rationale

This HIP suggests that security team members must be maintainers on _active_ Helm projects.

## Specification

According to the current documentation in [SECURITY.md], the only requirements for
security team members are as follows:

* Members MUST be active project maintainers as defined in [the governance]
* Members SHOULD engage in each reported vulnerability, at a minimum to make sure it is being handled
* Members MUST keep the vulnerability details private and only share on a need to know basis

This proposal suggests that the first requirement be amended to read:

> Members MUST be active project maintainers for an active project as defined in [the governance]

Further, the [SECURITY.md] document should be updated to indicate that a security team
member will be automatically removed if they are no longer affiliated with any
active (non-deprecated) projects.

## Backwards compatibility

N/A

## Security implications

The primary reason for this change is that we view it as a compromise of our security
posture to have vulnerability disclosures sent to non-maintainers. Making this change
improves our security posture.

## How to teach this

The change will be documented in [SECURITY.md]

## Reference implementation

The change will be made in [SECURITY.md]

## Rejected ideas

One might claim that security team members should be entitled to stay because of their
past experience. While we do not want to downplay the role of experience, we do want to
point out that it is unwise to allow unaffiliated individuals to have access to
vulnerability disclosures.

## Open issues

None currently.

## References

[SECURITY.md](security.md)
[the governance](governance/governance.md)