---
hip: 0005
title: "Helm Org Maintainers and Deprecated Projects"
authors: [ "Matt Butcher <matt.butcher@microsoft.com>" ]
created: "2020-09-24"
type: "process"
status: "draft"
---

## Abstract

This process proposal explains what happens to Helm organization maintainer slots when
a project is deprecated.

## Motivation

The current governance documents state that org maintainers may be selected from any of
the official Helm projects. However, as the Helm organization matures, some projects are
being deprecated. The governance docs are unclear what happens to org maintainers from
deprecated projects, and whether deprecated projects may hold org maintainer seats.

## Rationale

In the interest of keeping the Helm project thriving and alive, this HIP proposes that
only non-deprecated projects are entitled to org maintainer seats.

## Specification
To implement this, a new PR must be opened with the changes to the governance document.
The changes must be adopted by 2/3 supermajority of the _current org maintainers_ 
(including those maintainers who may be attached to deprecated projects).

The governance documentation for the Helm org will be updated as follows:

- All references to org maintainer seats for projects will clarify that they apply only
  to non-deprecated projects
- Text will clarify that when a project is deprecated, its org maintainers will
  be moved to Emeritus status _except_ where those maintainers may be able to keep their
  role because of their status on another Helm project, including the `helm/helm` project.
- The definition of an active maintainer will also be revised to specify that the
  maintained project must not be deprecated

## Backwards compatibility

N/A

## Security implications

N/A

## How to teach this

The [governance.md] document will be updated with precise language.

## Reference implementation

The [governance.md] document will contain all associated changes.

## Rejected ideas

### 1. Allowing maintainers of deprecated projects to stay

One might argue that maintainers of deprecated projects should be allowed to stay on as
org maintainers. This option was considered. But the design of the org maintainers board
was intended to give projects governing input into Helm. Essentially, allowing
maintainers of deprecated projects to take these slots means essentially that
non-owners will be given a say in Helm's direction. It would even be possible that non-owners
could have a majority voting stake in the Helm project. This did not seem right.

### 2. Requiring maintainers of deprecated projects to go even if they represented other projects as well

One might argue that if a maintainer was elected because of their involvement in project
X, their org maintainership should be inextricably tied to X. However, as written, this
proposal allows such a maintainer to simply stay on as a maintainer due to their
affiliation with another project, Y.

Our intention in forming the organizational maintainers was to give interested parties
a voice in steering Helm. Because such a party would still be formally affiliated with a
Helm project, we believe they fill the spirit of the original organizational motivations.

Of course, this does not prevent a maintainer from voluntarily stepping down when their
project is deprecated.

## Open issues

N/A

## References

[governance.md](https://github.com/helm/community/blob/main/governance/governance.md)